Things for EMRG have been moving forward,  not always at the speed and
direction we want, but good things are happening.

Work has kept me from coordinating the completion of the work on the Red Cross
radios, so the exercise we were hoping to do for March has moved out a couple
months. We have the Tour Nortel at the first of May, so maybe late May,
depending on what else is happening. I have spent some time on the process for
EMRG exercise planning and delivery, so we will have a model to use for the
first exercise, which if it works, will allow us to have exercises on a
consistent basis in the future. I'll be sending a note soon looking for people
to read through the process to make changes before we look for volunteers to
prepare the exercise.

I had the opportunity to do a presentation to the RCMP for the National Capital
Region this month. This is thanks to efforts of local Amateurs in the RCMP who
have been working on building a plan for how ARES fits into the RCMP
operations. The meeting went very well and I think the message was well
received. The key points made were that we are not there to back up their radio
systems, we don't have the capacity and our systems are probably less robust
than theirs. We do provide a window on the community, so they can get a good
picture of what is going on in the community, plus we can provide an alternate
secondary communications solution if the phones were out.

The fist site visit was completed this week at Ben Franklin Place. This is the
old Nepean City hall and is where Community Services would establish their
command centre in an emergency. The goal is to get some equipment permanently
installed so we have a UHF repeater and a UHF to VHF cross band repeater that
can serve Ben Franklin Place, 100 Constellation (Huge City office building next
door) and hopefully some of Algonquin College, a potential shelter site in some
disasters. The site looks promising, and we may be able to use some existing
antennas.  More to come.

After several years work at cleaning up the EMRG web site, giving it a new face
and keeping it up, Gord Phillips has handed over the web site to Tyler Tidman.
Tyler is a relatively new EMRG member who is taking an active role in Amateur
radio and EMRG. Thanks Gord for all the work you did and welcome aboard Tyler.

EMRG now has an ARES Liaison who will work with local ARES groups and our DEC
to manage EMRG -ARES information exchange and coordination.  Tyler Tidman has
taken on the task and will get his feet wet at our District Mutual Aid meeting
in April.

Mike Kelly continues to coordinate radio operators for Collegeville exercises.
Collegeville is the Federal Emergency Management College and provides an
excellent opportunity for Amateurs to see how an emergency would be managed, as
well as a chance to show Emergency Planners from across the country what ARES
can do. If you are interested, please contact Mike for upcoming dates
(VE3FFK@RAC.CA)

Back in January I took some bags of parts to the OARC meeting and people took
them home and brought back finished projects. I have been very busy lately so I
had not been following up with people, but they called me and volunteered to
bring the finished units to me. This is one of the ways the OARC is working to
support EMRG.

I missed the deadline for the OARC Groundwave this month, but I have submitted
the May article (originally the April article). Check out the Groundwave on the
OARC website. I will be getting them posted on the EMRG web site as well soon.

One of our EMRG supporters is donating some used equipment. There is a VHF beam
antenna and some UHF cavities, in a rack cabinet, plus a 30 Amp 12 VDC power
supply and battery charger unit. This equipment can be used for the solution at
Ben Franklin Place.

Regards
Peter

--
Peter Gamble -VE3BQP
Team Leader -Emergency Measures Radio Group
Emergency Coordinator (EC) -Ottawa ARES
