Counties of Renfrew, of Lanark, of Leeds-Grenville, of Prescott-Russell & of
Stormont-Dundas & Glengarry, Cities of Ottawa & of Cornwall

May 2010 DEC report for Seaway/Capital combined ARES Districts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Lanark North Leeds (LNL)-ARES group held their monthly meeting on May 8th
and discussed participating in the Smiths Falls Flea Market & special event
station CG3ADML celebrating 100 years of the RCN and Admiral Kingsmill, founder
of the RCN.  Also discussed annual Ottawa-Kingston cycle tour with VE3VY
coordinating the participation of LNL ARES, Field Day will be held at Conlon
Farm in Perth, the Toledo repeater is still not linked awaiting installation of
a link antenna. ARES District meeting was discussed & we are in need of a new
AEC for the Smiths Falls area. 

- The special event station CG3ADML held at the Portland Legion was a great
  success & demonstrated ham radio to about 80 sea cadets and their officers.
Admiral Dean McFadden of the RCN visited our display and had his photo taken
with our operators. An often heard remark from the cadets was ''cool''. The
event was organized by VE3GXW, George, ex RCN. An article has been sent to TCA.

- A brief informal meeting was held at the Smiths Falls Flea Market, between
  interested parties in Eastern Ontario on the subject of packet. Work is being
carried out to upgrade the digi-peater at VE3STP in Renfrew County. It was
suggested that information on each groups’ initiatives on packet be circulated
to others as a means of promoting this mode. Present were Norm Hagan, Graham
Patterson, Bob Howard and Mike Legiza. 

- Organization for the Ottawa-Kingston cycle tour is well underway. About 2000
  cyclists take part in this event which runs from Ottawa to Kingston on
Saturday June 5th returning June 6th. Approximately 50 amateurs participate,
providing communications and water resource support along the route. Net
Control operations hopscotch between Ottawa, Westport, and Kingston. Repair and
other support vehicles are equipped with APRS and manned by hams. This is a
major event for all. Last year some 250 messages were handled out of the
Westport location alone.  

Number of Net Sessions, Drills or Tests This Month: 4
Number of Registered Stations: 55

Renfrew County West (RCW)-ARES group had 7 members that attended the first
presentation of the ARES training course by DEC Mike Hickey VE3IPC and ADEC
Lance Peterson VA3LP, on May 1st and 15th.  The course was presented in 2 parts
on 2 Saturdays in Renfrew for the Renfrew County East and West ARES groups.
Those in attendance from the West group were: Dale VA3DNA, Richard VA3BIX,
Bernie VA3SUR, Jeremy N2ZLQ, Mike VE3ODJ, Don VE3IGN and Bob VE3YX. The
attendees enjoyed the course and felt it was very worth while. Along with
lectures, there were 2 exercises to help press home the information. A county
wide deployment exercise will be planned for a later date.

-The Phoenix Centre in Pembroke planned a fund raising event for May 29th. It
was a race taking place in and around Deep River patterned on the TV program
Amazing Race. A full report on the RCW ARES participation will be in the next
monthly report.

Number of Net Sessions, Drills or Tests This Month: 4
Number of Registered Stations: 20

- The Renfrew County East (RCE)-ARES group hosted the two day long ARES
  training course given on May 1st & 15th that was conducted by DEC Mike –
VE3IPC and ADEC Lance – VA3LP.  Our Lady of Fatima School in Renfrew gave us
the venue we needed so that the course could be given in a class setting and
have lots of halls & rooms for the radio exercise part of the course, which
demonstrated the value of the ARES training using the ARES net protocol, use of
the formal message form, the station log & message log forms.  In attendance
were 17 members in all from both Renfrew County ARES (east & west) groups.
Members attending from RCE-ARES group were; John - VE3DDN, Jim - VA3JER, Bill -
VE3TUC, Wayne - VE3JSQ, Mike - VA3TJP, Ben - VE3ZUO (Smith Falls), Doug -
VE3DGC, AEC Ron - VE3JRN, AEC Jim - VE3JKV and myself EC Paul - VA3COG, plus
from PR-ARES Harry – VA3ZAK (Rockland).  Being a new ARES group that started
with an ARES orientation presentation given to us by the DEC on Jan 23 2010,
this was our first ARES training that the leadership team also benefited.

- AEC Ron VE3JER invited the local Renfrew Mercury news paper to cover our
  group’s training class session for May 1st, and Renfrew TV Cogeco read the
article which lead them to cover our May 15th class session including the ‘on
air’ exercise at Fatima school.

- We will be working with the DEC and with the RCW-ARES EC on a combined
  deployed ARES emergency communications exercise County wide planned for
September, date to be defined.  We are looking into having members bring & use
each their ‘Outstation Go Kit’, which members have been asked to collect &
assemble through the summer months.  This should be a very interesting,
challenging and comprehensive Emcomm radio exercise, the first ever of this
sort for our very large county.

Number of Net Sessions, Drills = 02
Total Registered ARES stations = 19

The Cornwall ARES group’s close association with Seaway Valley Amateur Radio
Club (SVARC) Inc. continues.  The EC continues to provide short ARES updates to
the club members at the club’s monthly meetings.  Our last club meeting was May
31, 2010.  ARES enjoys much support from the club.

-It is envisioned that the VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+) 2-M repeater will play a major
role during an emergency where emergency communications are required.  Over the
last month two enhancements have been made to this effect;  

1.  Raising the antenna by 5 feet.  This was an added benefit to being asked by
the hospital to remove one antenna due to hospital expansion plans, and 

2.  While the repeater is fed by an electrical source which has an electrical
generator this enhancement will give us added comfort.  The repeater ident will
allow us to know when commercial power to this repeater has failed.   Both of
these enhancements were handled expeditiously by our Technical Adviser (VE3HTR)
and his team(s).

-Official ARES bulletins continue to be read by the EC and AECs on Mondays at
7:00 PM local on the club’s local 2-Metre net on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+).

Number of Net Sessions, Drills or Tests This Month: 4
Number of Registered Stations: 10

- The Prescott-Russell (PR)-ARES group will participate again in Field Day this
  year in Hawkesbury Ontario. We recently had two meetings to review and set
objectives, assign task in preparation to the Field Day 2010.

- Our regular Amateur Radio social get together on ‘Triode Thursdays’ was a
  discussion and learning topic on vertical antenna for the HF bands. We
started with theory and applications and we continued with hands on experience
by erecting various home brew antennas. After some adjustments and tuning, a HF
station was connected online. We proceeded to make some QSO's with various
degree of success.

- On a recent ‘Triode Thursday’ we were very pleased to have had Eric Meth –
  VE3EI on June 10th in Rockland Ontario representing ICOM Radio who gave us a
great and informative presentation and demonstration on D-Star radio, repeaters
and internet network links.  We thank Eric Meth for giving us his valued time
and provided us with much needed info on D-Start Radio.

Number of Net Sessions, Drills or Tests This Month: 4
Number of Registered Stations: 25

Rideau Lakes Cycle Tour 2010 - A previous news report put the number of
cyclists at 2200. From CBC Radio 1 news, 13:00 Monday June 7, 2010 provided the
following info. More than a thousand cyclists were forced to the side of the
road this past weekend during the long distance Rideau Lakes Cycle Tour. Tour
organizers say the weather turned sour Sunday as cyclists rode from Kingston to
Ottawa in Eastern Ontario. Cyclists faced cold temperatures, high winds and
driving rain. Mr. Bourseki is the Ottawa Bicycle Club's director of the Rideau
Lakes Tour. He says many cyclists weren't dressed for the wet weather and he
says some began to suffer from hypothermia before finally quitting. "We very
quickly had to figure out what we were going to do here and I have to say thank
you to all the municipalities along the route because people like the small
store owners , the Legion for instance at North Crosby just outside of
Westport.  All those people were wonderful in accommodating the cold riders
until we could get busses to them to pick them up."  Bourseki says organizers
hired seven busses at the last minute to drive along the route and pick up
stranded cyclists. He says the cost of the busses will be absorbed by the
Rideau Lakes tour committee.

-If you want to read about how the Rideau Lakes Cycle Tour goes on a good day,
read last year's report in Sep/Oct 2009 TCA.  This here is about the other kind
of event.  

For those of you who don't have last year's issues of TCA handy, here's the
condensed version: ‘A two day bicycle tour covering over 170 km/day, with
thousands of riders. Radio was handled by three nets on multiple repeaters by
over 50 hams, most of whom were ARES members.’  

- Saturday 2010 was a snooze, with no weather issues.  However, Sunday was
  another matter.  Suddenly we had hundreds of cold wet and tired cyclists
spread along a hundred kilometers of road. The radio task turned from support
to rescue over the course of a few minutes.  As organizers scrambled to find
busses to retrieve cyclists, the radio operators' cars became temporary
shelters for the cyclists nearest to hypothermia. Vehicles initially tasked
with repair and support got re-assigned to transporting cyclists to the nearest
shelter point. Shelter points, initially tasked with providing food and water,
now had to provide shelter and blankets for hundreds of cyclists who stayed,
rather than passing through as planned. Once busses were hired, there was still
the problem of how to transport thousand dollar bicycles on a bus designed for
people and luggage.

- Hams and ARES members, being what they are, were listening to the nets
  upstream of them before the route reached their area, and well before their
assigned "time on station".  As word of the problem was spread, their
controllers began calling operators in early to support the operations of the
segments where the bulk of the cyclists were in trouble. When they went to
their stations, the hams at the later parts of the course knew that they were
being tasked with more than the usual checkpoint routine. Some were diverted
from checkpoint to patrol duties, to compensate for the lack of patrol coverage
upstream. Everyone was aware that this was no longer an ordinary bike tour.

- Lessons learned: (Some learned them, some already knew them, some never get
  it)

- The "one to the many" aspect of an amateur radio net does a much better job
  of alerting everyone to a problem than the "one to one" operation of a
telephone, even where there is cell phone coverage.  It also enhances awareness
of developing problems, and improves the chances of finding the best plan of
action, since everyone with knowledge of the problem can get in.  The hardest
thing to get in an emergency is TIME.  Listening ahead saves you some.

- Amateurs need to be flexible, adaptable and resourceful. There is no place
  for "that's not how we used to do it" attitudes. Fortunately, most hams are
good at this part, and are especially good at the "resourceful" part.

- Organizers, as well as amateurs need to be pessimists when planning. They
  need to keep in mind the question "What's the worst that could happen?" Even
the most benign event can become a mess due to one weather event, fire or
transportation incident.

– Radio ops report from Mike Kelly, VE3FFK - AEC Ottawa ARES.

- DEC’s Corner -
Eastern Ontario ARES District Mutual Aid Conference brief report 2010

- The Seaway/Capital ARES District (Eastern Ontario) Conference was held on
  April 17th 2010 in Ottawa. This was the 6th annual conference that revolves
around 'Mutual Aid' across Eastern Ontario. This conference is where the
leadership team of all ARES and or Emcomm groups within the district were
invited to attend and report on their activities for the past 12 months. These
activities may be emergency operations or public service events supported,
group projects, challenges and successes, plus current to planned near future
activities.  This year each was asked to include what clients they have an MOU
with, verbal or written, and to describe the quality of that relationship.

- The ARES District Mutual Aid Program (DMAP) telephone exercise Before we
  could release the 'new and improved' version of the DMAP, we  first needed to
'test drive' it with making the telephone calls to each EC invoking the ARES
District Mutual Aid Program, with a scenario in a call for help, to test the
first version of the forms and process.  We did so just a few days before the
ARES District annual conference took place, and in addition we asked that all
Mutual Aid responders (folks who planned to come to the conference anyway)
deploy with their 3 day 'personal support kit' that had then yet to be defined.
Most amateurs usually have a different type of Go Kit in mind from the next
person and or from the next Emcomm group.   

- The DMAP deployed exercise

5 reasons for having responders pack and bring each their 'Personal Support' Go
Kit.

1.  To see who would play - some did, some did not.

2.  To learn what each brought - without inspection, but by 'in class session'
group discussion developing such a Personal Support Go Kit list together - what
should be in there at a minimum, that can now be used as a Mutual Aid standard
kit.

3.  To give a sense of realism in responding to a call for help, to each
person's personal deployment.

4.  To test drive the ARES or Emcomm on air Net Control operation in receiving
Mutual Aid responders coming from all parts of Eastern Ontario to Ottawa.

5.  To test drive the directing and receiving of all responders (plus exercise
observers) to the staging area. At the staging area, all responders are
processed by being registered as arrived. Responders exchange their personal
information form (including personal 'emergency contact' info) for a
preliminary briefing and assignment form. The Staging Area Manager then sends
them and their Personal Support Go Kit where a more extensive briefing is
given.

- Conclusion: 

1.  We now have an ARES (or Emcomm) District Mutual Aid document and process in
place that has now been accepted by all ARES group leadership teams within
Eastern Ontario, which started with an introductory exercise.

2.  We still have a long way to go yet before we can all feel confident that
all members of each leadership team knows how to handle the making of a call
for a request for Mutual Aid, and how to effectively respond to such a call to
provide assistance.

3.  Each group needs to plan and exercise a Mutual Aid response operation in
their respective area with regard to responding to a call for assistance to
deploy requested equipment, and also in deploying members willing and able to
deploy with their Personal Support Go Kit.

4.  Each group also needs to practice receiving Mutual Aid responders arriving
from outside their staging area, to process and track, to brief all arrivals,
and may also need to provide transportation to their destination.
Consideration for food & lodging may also be needed for responders arriving to
augment your Emcomm support for your local client(s).

- The groups represented were; Renfrew County West + East ARES groups, Lanark
  North Leeds ARES, Ottawa ARES, Cornwall ARES and Prescott-Russell ARES. There
was one observer from the Iroquois Amateur Radio Club's Emcomm group and two
observers from EMO.

- Persons present were; RCE-ARES – EC Paul VA3COG & AEC Ron VE3JRN , PR-ARES –
  tech Harry VA3ZAK, AEC Jim VA3KV & AEC Jean VE3OKK, Cornwall ARES – EC Earle
VE3IMP, AEC Joe VE3ADB & tech Doug VE3HTR, RCW-ARES –  EC Bob VE3YX, AEC Dale
VA3DNA, Ottawa ARES – district liaison Tyler VA3DGN, host Peter VE3BQP, AEC
Harold VA3UNK, AEC Rick VE3IHI, Margaret VA3VXN, LNL ARES – AEC Norm VE3VY, AEC
George VE3GWS & AEC Art VE3CGD, plus observers from IARC – Bob VE3AJV, and from
EMO – Field Officers Suzanne & Philippe. 

- Hosted by; The Ottawa (EMRG) ARES group at the Ottawa Fire Training Center.

- 'Emcomm Radio Relief' exercise operations;
Exercise Manager; AEC Mike VE3FFK with Ottawa ARES.
Exercise Net Control; Bob VA3QV with Ontario Phone Net.
Staging Area Manager & Briefer; Mike VE3FFK.
- Conducting ARES District Eastern Ontario Mutual Aid Conference;
DEC Mike VE3IPC & ADEC Lance VA3LP.
