North East Ontario Regional Directors Report for October, 2012
As you are probably aware, Radio Amateurs of Canada
received a letter in late September from the Hon. Robert Chiarelli the
Minister of Transportation confirming a five year extension starting
January 1, 2013 and extending until January 1, 2018 regarding Bill
118, 2009. I would like to thank all the groups, Organisations and
NGO’s from across Ontario who sent in letters of support for our
position. It was because of those letters that when RAC presented our
position to MTO Officials we were able to convince them on the
merit of our position. Only Amateurs can provide a province wide communications
infrastructure at no cost to the taxpayer. Again thanks to all the folks who assisted in this
and RAC will continue to pursue a permanent exemption in the future.
I suspect there are none of us who don’t dream of being on the other end of a
DX’pedition. Well for a Thunder Bay Amateur this will become a reality in March 2013.
Tom, VE3CX will be part of the Clipperton DX’pedition as an operator. I have known
Tom for a long time and certainly wish him well, but not without a bit of envy. When I
know more I will update you all.
Since most of us won’t be going to a rare location to operate the other side of a
pile up there is still an opportunity to be on the “receiving end” especially here in North
and East Ontario. Now that Ontario has been divided into four sections in the upcoming
ARRL Sweepstakes (among many), I expect ONN and ONE will be wanted Sections. It’s
not too early to start planning your participation in this contest. I am looking forward to
operating for the first time in this contest. Stay tuned for more info next month.
In many parts of the province October 13, local groups will be conducting
Simulated Emergency Tests. Please contact your local ARES Officials and offer your
services. It’s only through practice that we become proficient. I would be pleased to
receive a message from you or your club via Amateur Radio.
The following weekend October 20th and 21st , will be Jamboree on the Air (JOTA). This
would be a great time to contact a local scout group and be able to show them the great
hobby we share.
Now that many clubs are in full swing again I would offer my availability to
speak to your club via Skype or other suitable program. Obviously I cannot get to all the
clubs, but certainly would be pleased to talk via the web.
If you have any questions or concerns please email me at ve3xt@rac.ca.
Bill VE3XT
North East Ontario Regional Director
Radio Amateurs of Canada

