City of Ottawa, Counties of Prescott-Russell, SD&G, Leeds Grenville, Lanark and Renfrew

The Eastern Ontario ARES District started the month with an ARES display at the Ottawa Amateur Radio Club's yearly Fleamarket in Carp, ON on the 8th September. This was an opportunity for the new DEC Lance VA3LP, to meet many of the ARES members from throughout eastern Ontario.  We would like to thank the OARC for the space and Peter VE3BQP for his display. As we were located at the entrance it was one of the first stops for many amateurs entering the arena. There were a few who were interested in ARES and we provided information to guide them to their local ARES Group. We would also like to congratulate Mike VE3IPC as he moves from the DEC position in Eastern Ontario and takes over as Section Manager for the new Ontario East (ONE) Section. 

The Renfrew County East ARES Group has little to report this month other than we have our EC Ron VE3JRN back with us and on the mend after his knee operation and are glad to see that as of the last report from him he is coming along very well. Hope this continues with the help of his better half. It was nice to see so many of the Renfrew County East Ares group at the Carp ham fest early this month and at this time wish to congratulate our new DEC Lance on his new job and we will be working with him to help prepare our ARES groups with ongoing training and be prepared for any and all Emergency calls.
 
The Lanark and North Leeds ARES group  was busy this September. VE3GXW, George, VE3BNZ, Helen, VE3PYG, Dave and VE3VY Norm attended the Carp hamfest. There were four local VHF nets during the month, four breakfast meetings were held at Michaels Restaurant in Perth. The Almonte group of LNLARES participated in the Mississippi River Clean up.  The wx forecast the day before was for morning rain and clearing in the pm but the am turned out beautiful; sunny with a few clouds, coolish with a good north wind. It actually was very nice. Bill VE3AAS and Murray VE3IFP were net control from Bill's vehicle, at the park. Don VE3PDF and Bernie VE3BMZ were at the hospital. Stan was at Blakney in his vehicle. John VE3ILO was in a boat on the other side of the power station using his IC92 and  tom VE3ELM was in a boat that covered the waterway from the park up to the first set of rapids (about one mile long) using an IC92. UHF 444.3 MHz used from the firehall which worked perfectly (147.240 MHz was the fallback in case of a problem with the firehall), We did not try D-STAR. We were there from 8am until noon. The actual collection on the waterway started at 9am. There were 3 or 4 kayaks that made it all the way to Blakney; 3 canoes covering the shoreline up to the rapids. The boats were mainly used as safety units as well as collecting refuse spotted by the canoes/kayaks. Quite a bit of junk was collected and the event was deemed a success by the event organizer Mike O'Malley of the Mississippi Riverwatchers, who was very pleased that we were along in case of an emergency. More information on the cleanup can be gleaned from the following link: http://www.millstonenews.com/2012/09/first-annual-mississippi-river-appreciation-day-event-a-success-by-every-measure.html
The Group helped Stan VE3SMM take down his tent and it was about 12:30 when we were finished. Not much happened in the way of communication aside from our chatter just to let Bill VE3AAS know where we were from time to time and what progress was being made.
All in all it went very smoothly. The orghanizers took a few pictures. I believe there will be something in the EMC. Bill VE3AAS also took pictures which we can post on the web site. As well this month, Barrie VE3BSB, EC, met with the fire chief of Montague Township to plan on an SET for October.

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group Well September had a fairly busy month. It started out with many of the members attending the Ottawa Amateur Radio Club's annual Carp Fleamarket on the 8th of September. The group had a table set up and manned mainly by Jim VA3KV and augmented by anyone who dropped by to give him a break. It was easy to see the success of the flearmarket by the number of items that quickly disappeared from the tables and went out the door. The group then had an ARES course over two Thursday evenings - 20th and 27th September - with the following members attending - Jim VA3KV, Jean VE3OKK, Mark VE3TKN, Jean VE3ZJS, Don VE3RM, Normand VA3NPL and Chris VA3NKE. Instruction was given by Lance VA3LP. The following Sunday saw the following group members out on an exercise to practice what was learned on the two previous Thursdays. Don VE3RM as Net Control, Jim VA3KV, Jean VE3OKK, Jean VE3ZJS, Normand VA3NPL as outstations passing traffic throughout the Champlain township including the City of Hawkesbury and the town of Vankleek Hill. Lance VA3LP provided messages and assignment of locations for each station. Jean VE3OKK was the staging clerk for the DMAP portion of the exercise. James VA3JRP came out to provide roaming assistance to operators who were having trouble communicating. At the debrief afterwards, a lot of lessons learned were recorded and hopefully implemented in the coming months. Later that evening the group got together at the Lady Hawkesbury in Hawkesbury to say good by to one of our long time members, Henry VA3OV and his wife Andre, who are moving down to southern Ontario. We wish them good luck in their further adventures. On the regular ARES NET on Tuesday evenings, the number of members joining was low, but September is usually a busy month for folks as the kids are off to school and starting the new season of youth activities.

