North East Ontario Regional Directors Report for Nov, 2012

	I would like to start this month’s report highlighting those Amateurs who have stepped up to be Assistant Directors. Due to the size of North East Ontario I will never be able to visit all the corners of the region. That is why I rely on the AD’s to represent RAC across the region. One long time AD has decided to take a bit of a hiatus and I especially want to thank Roy Brockelbank, VE3FOD for his assistance and help over the last 5 years. Thank you Roy. I also want to thank Dave Hayes, VE3JX for stepping in and being the AD for the SSM area. I also wish to say congratulations to another AD, Al Boyd, VE3AJB who recently received an Accolade from his employer the OPP. In a press release the OPP states in part, “Manitoulin Island Ontario Provincial Police’s longest-serving full-time member has been recognized with an OPP Accolade award for his dedication to the service. The Accolade award recognizes an individual whose actions and behaviours demonstrate and/or exceed commitment to the OPP and their communities”. Having met Al and his family I can also attest he is very deserving of this award. Congratulations Al.
The RAC Directors and Executive will be having our annual Strategic Planning sessions this month. This is where we determine where RAC should be going. But the most important part of this is to hear from YOU. Yes the membership, do you have ideas on the future or RAC as it is your organisation. If you have a comment please send me an email. 
RAC has asked for and received legal advice on the Distracted Driving Legislation standing now that the Ontario Government has been suspended. We were advised this will have no effect on the status of the legislation and our five year extension remains. However I still suggest that you use caution when operating mobile.
As mentioned in last month’s report the ARRL Sweepstakes goes this month with the CW portion on November 3rd to the 5th and the Phone test going on the 17th to the 19th.  Now that Ontario has 4 sections and few contesters the sections ONN and ONE will be much sought after. Even if you’re not a contester this is a great way to work some new states or get that last province you need in the log. I don’t have room here to list all the rules so here is a link to the ARRL site: http://www.arrl.org/sweepstakes   
If I was operating QRP here is what I would send when responding to VA3RAC:  “VA3RAC 001 Q VE3XT 70 ONN”. It translates as I am working VA3RAC, he is my first QSO and I am running QRP, my callsign is VE3XT, I was first licensed in 1970 and my section is Ontario North”. Hope to work you in this one.
If you have any questions or concerns please email me at ve3xt@rac.ca.

Bill VE3XT
North East Ontario Regional Director
Radio Amateurs of Canada
