As December is usually a slow month, it was no different this year for the
Eastern Ontario District.

EMRG/Ottawa ARES Group activities for December 2012 started on the fifth with
the usual monthly repeater check, headed by Dave, VE3KMV. The repeaters were
still working as they should. All repeaters check OK with the usual minor
anomalies. Thanks to Paul VE3CPH, Bob VA3QV, Mike VE3UMC, Arthur VA3BIT, and
Stuart VE3SMF. Arthur usually checks in bicycle mobile, which is a good test
due to fairly low ERP and low height, and a mix of stationary and mobile
operation.

Mike VE3FFK reported EMRG packet BBS and Winlink node were operating normally,
as was VE2CRA voice. Stuart also reported packet BBS working OK

Richard, VE3UNW received and shared some feedback from the "Understanding
Interdependence" seminar from the previous month. The main point seems to be
that information sharing processes need to be re-enforced. Getting together to
talk with the other players seems to be a good first step.

Peter, VE3BQP reports that another 3 year agreement with funding has been
signed with the city, continuing a process that began in 1996. This is the most
tangible form of proof of the commitment the City has to EMRG (and vice
versa). 

As part of changes Ottawa Fire is making to their station at Barrhaven, they
will be moving the VA3OFS repeater within the building. At the same time, it
will be upgraded to a Kenwood TKR 750 with a new back up battery. The antenna
will be upgraded in the spring, and the long delayed UHF repeater will go in at
that time. As all this is going on, we have been asked to provide a
presentation to them so they can better understand who we are and what we do.
See the point about information sharing nearer the top of this note. 

Now that the radio equipment is installed at Ottawa Red Cross, the next step
will be to install a packet station there so they can exchange text traffic
with their counterparts in neighbouring districts.

All in all, although it was a light month for meetings and public service
activities, there has been a lot going on below the surface in December.

In Renfrew County West there were 3 net sessions in Dec. (no net on Dec. 26th).
However, The following was not reported in November. Bob VE3YX was invited to
observe an AECL exercise described: "Transportation Accident Exercise Delta XI
will be conducted in 2012 November 23rd. This will be a full-deployment type
exercise, where the Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) will be activated, and
Chalk River Laboratories (CRL) resources dispatched to respond to a simulated
off-site transportation accident involving radioactive material. This exercise
is designed to test our plans and the response capabilities of our various
response groups on site, as well as an opportunity to engage our external
stakeholders in a full scale exercise."

The stakeholders mentioned were OPP, County EMS, Deep River Fire, and
Laurentian Hills Fire. The accident scene was set up behind the Chalk River
Fire Hall. There was a 5 ton truck on its side with barrels simulating
radioactive materials that had spilled out of the truck in the accident. There
was a half ton truck that had hit the back of the truck and the driver was
trapped in the half ton. There was a small car with 4 passengers that had hit
the front of the truck. The victims were quite well made up with injuries.

The Pembroke Observer article on this exercise is at the following link:
http://www.thedailyobserver.ca/2012/11/24/mock-disaster-training

Bob was quite impressed with the quality of the responses from the various
agencies. There was no ARES involvement, as normal communications were not
affected by the incident. AECL and RCW-ARES have met about installing VHF
equipment in their EOC at Chalk River and in their RAT mobile (Radiation
Assessment Team).

Activities for the Prescott-Russell ARES Group was very slow in December. There
was the usual get together on Thursday evenings at Chamberland Centre in
Rockland. Main topics were the situation with the VA3PRA repeater, presently
down for repair and upgrade, search for a new EC to replace Henry VA3OV, and
the well being of the local amateur radio club. 

In the coming months it is expected that an important discussion throughout the
Eastern Ontario District will be a further integration of the individual group
packet systems to better serve our clients. 
