Eastern Ontario ARES District June report

City of Ottawa, Counties of Prescott-Russell, of SD&G, of Leeds Grenville, of
Lanark and of Renfrew. 

***Special note for TCA editor and Ontario Section Manager.  The ARES District
that has been called The Seaway / Capital ARES District is longer - and the EMO
boundaries have just yet again changed as of June 19th.  With EMO deleting the
Seaway Sector, I now need our District to be recognized from now on as ‘The
Eastern Ontario ARES District’. This is needed for the ARES District Mutual Aid
group association for Eastern Ontario to remain intact***

- The Prescott-Russell (PR)-ARES group had a very busy month for the
  Prescott-Russell ARES Group. Most folks have been busy preparing for field
day. Lance Peterson VA3LP and Mike Hickey VE3IPC attended two Emergency
Management Ontario sessions this month. The first was an all-day EMO Sector
meeting. It was a great opportunity for them to meet CEMCs and other municipal
officials from many parts of Eastern Ontario. They learned a lot about what has
been happening in the emergency support service throughout Ontario. A few days
later Lance and Mike again returned to Pembroke for a two day Basic Emergency
Management (BEM) course instructed by 2 EMO Field officers. This was a very
good basic course that will lay the foundation necessary to understand and
complete the next level Emergency Management Course offered by Emergency
Management Ontario. 

- Immediately after that the PR-ARES Group was heavily involved with the
  Prescott-Russell Amateur Radio Club (PR-ARC) sponsored Field Day. This year
the event was held at Higginson Tower in Vankleek Hill Ontario using the club
call VE3PRD. The club operated 1A and in conjunction with that also had a
VHF/UHF station mounted in the top of the tower with 6m and 2m/70cm beams.
Although Lance, VA3LP was the FD manager, most of the work was done by Ron
VA3RRZ. A big hearty thanks to Jean VE3ZJS and Louise Sproule from the local
independent newspaper "The Review" who were both instrumental in securing the
FD site for us as well as providing a huge amount of media support. Attending
as operators and site builders were: Lance VA3LP, Ron VA3RRZ, Don VE3RM, EC
Henry VA3OV, Jean VE3OKK, Normand VA3NPL, Wenda VE3WMT, Jim VA3KV (who built a
beautiful multiband dipole and home-made ladder line for HF), Jean VE3ZJS (who
made sure that supper was served). We would also like to thank our local
sponsor Tulmar Industries of Hawkesbury Ontario for the use of their blow up
tent, which in spite of a small leak, was a great place to have the HF station.
A big thank you goes to the town of Vankleek Hill and the Higginson Tower
Committee for the use of the historical Tower for our Field Day. The weather
was wonderful for the whole of the operation. In spite of that there were many
"lessons learned" which will prepare us for next year's FD or, should it
happen, an emergency within the communities that we serve.

- The Renfrew County West (RCW)-ARES group will have one of the group member
  leaving the area, but the group will have another about member soon to be
licenced.

The group activities are as follows; On June 6th, AEC Dale VA3DNA attended the
EMO's annual Capital Sector meeting in Pembroke for Emergency Management people
like CEMCs and other municipal officials. Dale made several useful contacts
with area CEMCs.

- Paddlequest was held on June 10th. The number of participants canoeing or
  kayaking from Petwawawa to Pembroke has dropped from 150 in earlier years to
less than 100 this year. Perhaps the event is becoming "old hat". As usual, the
ARES participation was organized by Fred VA3FPB who also did net control. Ron
VE3JRN, EC for Renfrew County East, came up the valley to ride the OPP safety
boat. Mike VE3ODJ rode the Pembroke Fire Department boat and Dale VA3DNA rode
the Base Petawawa zodiac. Les VE3PL and Val VE3UEW used their pontoon boat as a
safety boat. The weather was perfect and the only rescues required were for
people that just got tired of paddling!

- On June 19th there was a workshop and setup exercise for the Laurentian Hills
  / Deep River Nuclear Plan Reception Centre. The morning workshop included
presentations from several of the groups involved including AECL, The Red Cross
and ARES and EC Bob VE3YX gave the ARES presentation. The afternoon setup
exercise had the Reception Centre completely set up and ready to receive
evacuees. RCW-ARES set up the radio station with both voice and packet. We also
operated voice and packet stations at the Red Cross in Pembroke and the MEOC in
Pt. Alexander. We used this exercise as an excuse to do a bit of an exercise of
our own. Packet messages (originated by us) were passed, using Outpost, amongst
the three stations. A number of the Reception Centre staff stopped by the radio
station to check us out and see the packet messages coming and going.
Connections with AECL were reinforced with the intent of installing amateur
radio in their EOC and their "RAT Mobile" emergency response vehicle.

At the Reception Centre station ops were Bernie VA3SUR and Bob VE3YX. At the
MEOC were Richard VA3BIX and Yvonne VE3RYA. Rob VA3AGN was alone at the Red
Cross.

- The Renfrew County Amateur Radio Club (RC-ARC) and RCW-ARES set up a 2A Field
  Day station in Riverside Park in Pembroke. An interview at the site with club
president Lewis VE3QJ appeared in the Pembroke Observer. 

- On Canada Day, Yvonne VE3RYA and EC Bob VE3YX set up a portable station at
  the Deep River waterfront to demo Ham Radio and participate in the Canada day
contest. The location was poor for RF, but close to the Canada Day activities,
especially the barbeque! We did manage to get a few contacts, even 2 RAC
stations.

- The Renfrew East (RCE)-ARES group is slowly but surely getting more members,
  and as we do we add them to our phone tree. 

- On June 06 EC Ron VE3JRN attended a meeting of the EMO Capital Sector meeting
  as an observer. He said that he had learned a lot and was pleased.

- On Sunday June 13 EC Ron VE3JRN worked Paddlequest with the Renfrew County
  West (RCE)-ARES group.

On June 18/19 EC Ron ve3jrn attended a Basic Emergency Management (BEM) course
in Pembroke and was successful in passing the exam.

- In July ARES Group East plans on working with the CRRA VE3STP RPT group and
  the Greater Madawaska Fire Dept. This will be used as a call out from the
Renfrew East Group.  More to follow in my July Report

This report was submitted by AEC Jim VA3JER

The Ottawa (EMRG) ARES group conducted their June RPT tests on Wednesday June
6th by Dave, VE3KMV with Ron VE3ACZ, Mike VE3IPC, Joe VE3EUS and Sandy VE3AAC
and participating. Mike, VE3FFK checked the Winlink node and BBS and found both
to be operating normally. VE2CRA RPT, the Ottawa ARC club repeater was given a
much more thorough test during the Rideau Lakes Cycle tour (see below).

- On June 9 and 10 we EMRG / Ottawa ARES assisted the Ottawa Bicycle Club with
  the Rideau Lakes Cycle Tour, a tour between Ottawa and Kingston with about
2100 participants. This event sees ARES groups in Kingston, Lanark and Ottawa
handing traffic off to each other as the cyclists move along the course. This
year we used VE2CRA, a club repeater of the Ottawa Amateur Radio Club, rather
than one of the EMRG (ARES) repeaters, to improve our reach toward the south of
the course. The following hams from Ottawa were involved. There were a similar
number from the other two ARES groups who served. * indicates EMRG member:

*VA3BIT Arthur,*VA3DGN Tyler,*VA3DRV Marc,*VA3FAW Doug,VA3JME Jamie,VA3JO
John,VA3MTZ Mike,VA3PTO Scott,*VA3QV  Bob,*VA3UNK Harold,*VA3VXN Margaret,
VE2AAY Francois,*VE3AVA Gord,*VE3EUS Joe,*VE3FFK Mike,*VE3IHI Rick,VE3KL
Dave,*VE3SMF Stuart,VE3TLY Dave,*VE3UNW Richard,*VE3ZTU Alan,*Dave VE3KMV 

- June 23 & 24 was Field Day across North America.  Many of our members
  participated.  Many were at the Ottawa ARC site, with a few at other club
sites, or operating on their own or with friends.  Submitted by EMRG’s Public
Relations AEC Mike VE3FKK.

- DEC Mike VE3IPC June report: On June 6th in Pembroke Ontario ADEC Lance
  VA3LP, RCE-ARES EC Ron VE3JRN, RCW-ARES AEC Dale VA3DNA and myself attended
the annual EMO Sector meeting for CEMCs and their alternates and other
municipal officials.  This was an excellent opportunity for Eastern Ontario
ARES District to give an educational Amateur Radio & ARES presentation.  This
was followed by a 7 minute ARES video that was created for us by Renfrew County
TV Cogeco News.  The feedback was positive and proved to be useful for Renfrew
County ARES groups.  The responsible EMO Field Officer for Capital Sector plans
on sending to all attendees a copy of each presenters power points, so that
should prove to be useful to all attending officials.

- EMO Field Officers held the Basic Emergency Management (BEM) course on June
  18th & 19th in Pembroke Ontario.  There were about a dozen CEMC and or
alternate students in attendance among which ADEC Lance VA3LP, EC Ron VE3JRN
and myself were accepted to also attend alongside other municipal officials as
well as a Cornwall Red Cross official.   I am very happy to say that we all
passed the course and will each receive the BEM course certificate.  It is
worth mentioning here that another current EC has had the BEM course a few
years ago, EC for RCW-ARES Bob VE3YX.  

- In light of the ‘Canadian Emergency Management College’ having closed its
  doors permanently last month after having been in business since the 1950’s,
I strongly encourage any ARES group leadership team member that gets an
opportunity to take the EMO BEM course, should seriously consider taking it.
You will be better able to understand and function in an activated EOC
environment, if ever you need to be there, and be accepted by the Municipal
Control Group.  The holder of the EMO BEM course certificate will have the
needed credibility with local emergency management officials and the municipal
control group, thus having a much better relationship with your local
client(s). 
