Eastern Ontario ARES District
Report July 2013

The Eastern Ontario ARES District had a slow month in July this year. Most
amateurs are involved in summer activities not related to ARES. But I do know
that many groups are gearing up to prepare for the coming fall activities
including SET in October. The DEC for Eastern Ontario is preparing to give an
ARES course in September in Renfrew to help a group of amateurs become more
active in ARES.

For the Ottawa ARES/EMRG Group July was another month of infrastructure work at
EMRG / Ottawa ARES.

There was the usual repeater test session on July 3, conducted by Dave VE3KMV,
and assisted by Ron VA3ACZ, Tim VA3PYC and Mike VE3FFK. Repeater VE2CRA seemed
to be having problems this month, but the digital systems were up and running.

On July 20 there was a work session at the communications centre, where items
were sorted in to "Keep, Sell or Scrap" categories, and much space once more
made usable. Clayton VA3CBJ, Harold VA3UNK, Rick, VE3IHI, Stuart VE3SMF,
Richard VE3UNW, and Gord VE3XGP were led by Peter VE3BQP on this project.
Future work sessions will focus on completing the infrastructure wiring and
building up the fixed site and portable kits. Some of this includes;

* Finalizing the wiring of the two 30 Amp power supply/battery chargers that
* are now in the
repeater rack, as well as the two 15 Amp ones in the communications room.

* Setting up and networking the are computers, including a desktop and laptop
* with radio
programming software installed.

* Building up and installing in cabinets the shelves and radio systems for the
* City EOC, Fire
dispatch, backup dispatch and Fire HQ.

* Wiring and programming VHF and UHF radios for voice and packet, so they are
* ready for
deployment.

On July 23 VE3BQP Peter, and VE3FFK Mike did some re-routing of the coax
between the antennas and the radios at the Ottawa office of the Red Cross, to
accommodate changes in the locations of emergency operations within the
building. This had the happy result of shortening the lentghs of these coax
runs. At the same time, SWR sweeps of the antennas were also done and proved
satisfactory.

73 Mike Kelly VE3FFK, Ottawa ARES AEC, reporting for
Richard Hagemeyer, VE3UNW Ottawa ARES EC/ EMRG team leader.

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group was busy in July supporting two local
communities with activities. On July 1st, the group provided security at the
Clarence-Rockland Fireworks. In attendance were Jim VA3KV, Harry VA3ZAK (also
operating HF on Canada Day), Lance VA3LP, Chris VA3NKE, Ray-Allen VA3ONN and
his wife Suzanne, Ron VA3RRZ, Mike VE3IPC, George VA3SUS and his friend
Patrick. In mid July a few of the members volunteered to provide support to the
Wendover Western Festival. This is an opportunity to bring in some funds for
the group. In support of this was Chris VA3NKE, Lance VA3LP, Harry VA3ZAK,
Ray-Allen VA3ONN and his wife Suzanne and George VA3SUS and his friend Patrick.

There was the usual Tuesday evening ARES Nets but the turnout was low as most
folks are away for the summer. There were no official meetings for the summer.

The Stormont Dundas and Glengary ARES Group Close association with the Seaway
Valley Amateur Radio Club (SVARC) Inc. continues. The club has taken a
"holiday" for July and August.  During our last meeting held on June 26, 2013
updates on ARES activities were provided to the membership.

The RAC Official ARES Bulletins continue to be read each Monday, at 7:00 PM
local, on the club’s 2Metre net conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+). HAMs are
also asked to check in on the VE3MTA (UHF) repeater. This process confirms the
serviceability of our repeater systems at least once a week should they be
required by ARES.

Our expansion to “SD&G ARES” from the former “City of Cornwall ARES” continues.
An ARES presentation was made at the North Stormont's annual emergency
management training and exercise on June 19th at North Stormont Place,
Avonmore.

Earle DePass, (VE3IMP) Emergency Coordinator (EC), SD&G ARES
