DECEMBER 2013 ARES District Report:
As most folks in the Eastern Ontario ARES District were kept busy with
family and friends at Christmas and New Year’s, there is not much to
report this month. I hope at all ARES groups have a safe and
prosperous New Year.

The Ottawa EMRG/ARES Group had their usual repeater tests this month,
a good turnout and all repeaters checked out. Thanks to Tracy VA3TXN,
Tim VA3PYC, Roger VE3NPO, Arthur VA3BIT, and Sandy VE3AAC. Good
coverage near the boundaries (Tracy at Metcalfe and Tim at Carp).
Barrhaven UHF repeater 444.950 is working quite well; was able to
communicate well with 1-2W ERP from base antenna downtown.

There was some minor breakup on Dave's VE3KMV signal through the
VA3EMV West (145.210) which appears related to audio level at his
location. Possibly high deviation which was not noted on any other
signals. Repeater  VE2CRA, and the EMRG packet network are both
functioning.

Dave VE3KMV

The Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group  Reported by VE3VY AEC VE3BSB EC

Dec 15th we held the LNLARES Christmas Luncheon at the Cove Inn in
Westport. 29 persons attended. A Christmas Tree with a ham radio
equipment free exchange was successful. Donations were made to the
Westport Food Bank. Several prizes donated by the club and local
business were drawn by lucky ticket holders. Everyone was pleased with
the outing.

Repeater improvements: On Saturday 28 December. John VE3OAX, Wayne
VE3ICF and VE3BSB replaced the Toledo repeater with a Motorola MSR
2000. New GM300 link radios were installed but not yet activated until
check out is completed. This will require a return to the site.
Coverage has been verified into Perth and down to Highway 401. Audio
gain adjustments may be required following on air tests.

Repairs were made to the Rideau Ferry UHF repeater and it is back on
the air and linked to Christie Lake and Lavant. VE3LCA/R has been
reactivated providing local coverage on 146.955- in the Perth Area.

A new repeater to replace VE3RNU/R Tweed repeater is under test at VE3BSB QTH.

Digital communications: John VE3PUX joined has joined the activities
using Winmor.

VE3OJC, VE3GXW, VE3ERA and VA3DOY have acquired new TNC-X’s for use
with RMSE VHF Packet. The VE3REX-7  Westport node continues to
function well notwithstanding the inclement weather. Daily traffic
continues with stations in Kingston and Westport. VE3BSB in Perth
re-activated his digital station using a connection via VE3REX-7.
Plans are afoot to hold one or more training/setup sessions in
Westport in January, re tnc’s and other related matters. VA3DOY is
expecting to establish a second RMS Packet station with Internet
access, in Westport.

73’s, Norm

The Renfrew County West ARES Group Had 4 nets this month - even on the
25th tho' only 2 checkins that day!

On Dec. 3rd, GC Bob VE3YX and David VE3XAV met with AECL Chalk River
Emergency Management personnel who indicated an interest in installing
amateur radio equipment in their on-site EOC and alternate EOC. They
also have an off-site EOC in Deep River and an emergency response
vehicle that they would like to equip. We discussed the type of
equipment and antennas that we felt would be most appropriate. We also
discussed the licensing and operation of the stations. The intent
seemed to be to move quickly on this, so we may hear of progress soon.

That's all for 2013.......

The SD&G Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) continues it’s close
association with the SVARC continues. During our last meeting held on
Nov. 27, 2013 updates on ARES activities were provided to the
membership. The club also held annual elections for Jan. 01, 2014 -
Dec. 31, 2015. The new executive is:

President: Ed Halliwell (VE3FHI), Vice President: Doug Pearson (VE3HTR),
Treasurer: Elizabeth Halliwell  (VE3EZH), Secretary: Joe Scott (VA3ADB).
Official ARES Bulletins
ARES bulletins continue to be read each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on
the club’s 2-Metre net conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+). HAMs are
also asked to check in on the VE3MTA (UHF) and D-STAR repeaters. This
process confirms the serviceability of four of the SVARC repeater
systems at least once a week should they be required by ARES.

Expansion to SD&G ARES
Our expansion to “SD&G ARES” from the former “City of Cornwall ARES” continues.

Ice Storm Preparedness
During the ice storm activities of Dec. 20-23, 2013 I took the
initiative to contact the CEMCs of three municipalities with whom we
have agreements (South Stormont, South Glengarry and City of
Cornwall). This allowed confirmation of the cell numbers and confirmed
that the services of ARES were available and ready should they be
needed.

Next ARES Exercise
Our next ARES-wide exercise is now planned for Feb. 1, 2014.
Earle DePass, (VE3IMP) Emergency Coordinator (EC),  SD&G ARES
