Eastern Ontario ARES District
Report August 2013

The Eastern Ontario ARES District had some activity in August but most groups
are in slow motion for the summer. As we begin our trek into the fall, the
District Emergency Coordinator, Lance VA3LP, is preparing to instruct an ARES
course in Renfrew in mid September. He will also be attending the Carp Hamfest
sponsored by the Ottawa Amateur Radio Club. There will be much to report next
month on the goings-on in Eastern Ontario

The Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group had four weekly 2 meter net sessions during
the month and five weekly breakfast meetings.

Dennis, VA3DOY, our newest ham is preparing to install a Windom antenna at his
QTH. John VE3PYX and Norm VE3VY are looking forward to a QCWA cruise to the
Caribbean in late October.  Digital update - A new Yaesu FT7900 transceiver and
a KPC3+ tnc have been installed at the VE3REX-7 site near Westport. A total of
$2500.00 in donations has now been received. The last $500 from the Chamber of
Commerce. Additional installation work is contemplated including a solar power
installation. A Paclink kit is being assembled to be used as a loaner for
anyone wanting to try their hand at digital communications. George, VE3GXW is
actively engaged in this project. The digital node at Kingston was moved from
the John Orr Tower to a new location on a 200 foot tower on a hill north of
Kingston. An additional node VE3FPN-7 has been installed at the fire station in
Sydenham. The work in Kingston has been carried out by the Frontenac Emcomm
Group. Daily and weekly transmissions take place to ensure path and equipment
reliability. Plans are underway to hold a digital exercise including the
Frontenac and Westport operators, on September 10th.

Norm Hagan VE3VY

August saw The Ottawa ARES/EMRG Group ticking over at a low level, as is usual
for the summer months.

The monthly repeater test went well on August 7 under the direction of Dave,
VE3KMV with the participation of Ron VA3ACZ, Tim VA3PYC and Mike VE3FFK. PYC
and FFK also frequently used the Winlink node and BBS on 145.030 and tested the
BBS on 145.010. All were working normally for most of the month. As part of
this process, and to provide something to read on the BBS, extracts from the
weekly RAC Ontario ARES bulletin are posted on the 145.030 BBS. They remain
available for about a week.

There was another work session at the communications centre on August 10.
Peter, VE3BQP was assisted by Ron VA3ACZ, Wayne VE3CZO, Mike VE3FFK, Rick
VE3IHI, Brian VE3UU, and Alan VE3ZTU. Much of the work consisted of sorting
tagging and packing various items. Rick spent the morning working on the
repeater cabinet, discovering and correcting some factory installed connector
problems, and making changes to the power wiring. It seems that in addition to
a small core of regulars, each call for workers results in a few others coming
in to help. Thanks to all who have helped out.

73 Mike Kelly VE3FFK, Ottawa ARES AEC, reporting for
Richard Hagemeyer, VE3UNW Ottawa ARES EC/ EMRG team leader.

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group had a very slow month in August. The usual
Tuesday night Nets brought a few folks out and a few more came out for the
Thursday evening get togethers in Rockland at the Chamberlain Centre. Most of
our members were busy with family and traveling. Some discussion is still
ongoing on Broadband Hamnet and how it can be set up in our area. A few folks
are interested in making the July QST article on a bluetooth interface into a
group project for this fall and winter. It is now time for the group to return
to full strength and prepare for SET 2013.
