Eastern Ontario ARES District
Report April 2013

The Eastern Ontario ARES District groups are having many of the same challenges
that have plagued them for years. The biggest concern is the low number of
amateurs that are willing to become involved with ARES and turn out for
exercises in support of their communities. This is where mutual aid can be
applied, but must be requested in a timely manner. Another challenge is that
although we have been previously involved with yearly events, we must be
proactive and contact the event organization early to ensure our involvement.
The District will be holding it's annual meeting on Saturday the 25th of May in
the Council Chambers of the City of Clarence-Rockland, ON. All ARES members are
encouraged to attend.

Report submitted by Lance Peterson DEC Eastern Ontario District

The Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group's stats remain the same for April. The
LNLARES MCP (Mobile Command Post) was moved to the Lions RV Park site just
North of Westport, in April. It will house the WL2K Digi/Node VE3REX-7. There
is now a 12 volt standby power for the Node. It remains a link to VE3VY-10 RMS
Packet Internet link as well as via VE3FRG7/VE3FRG-10 RMS Packet Internet link
in Kingston. A donation of $100 was made to the Westport Lions Club.  A new
High Altitude Balloon Launch will take place May 8th from Perth bearing the
call sign VE3MW-11.

EC Barrie Crampton VE3BSB was awarded a Queen's Jubilee Medial. The medal and
certificate was awarded recently in Drummond North Elmsley (DNE) Township. The
certificate reads “Barrie Crampton has been involved in the community by
playing an integral part in bringing high speed/broadband internet to rural
Lanark County. He is also a member of the DNE 200th Anniversary Committee, and
is coordinator of the Amateur Radio Emergency Services organization. The news
article can be seen at the following link:
http://www.yourottawaregion.com/news/article/1609461--drummond-north-elmsley

Report submitted by Norm Hagan VE3VY AEC LNL ARES

The Ottawa ARES/EMRG Group's monthly repeater tests all checked out OK. Thanks
to Dave, VE3KMV, Paul VE3CPH, Tracy VA3TXN, and Arthur VA3BIT. The Winlink and
packet systems were running normally.

On April 28 our primary repeater was used for a search and rescue exercise
conducted by the volunteer SAR group in the area. Preparations are underway for
the Lanark Highlands Forest Rally, and the Cycle for CHEO event on May 4 and 5
respectively. In the former, the difficulty is a shortage of hams available to
cover the event. In the latter the difficulty is that we did not get
confirmation that we would be assisting until rather late in the process.
Although we have done the event for many years, the event organizers have not.
This is becoming a more common occurrence as public service events undergo
turnover in the teams that run them. It has happened on a few occasions now
that key pieces of the corporate memory of an event reside with the hams and
other volunteer "worker bees" who have participated in the event for years. I
wonder if other groups are finding the same thing.

Report submitted by Mike Kelly VE3FFK, Ottawa ARES AEC

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group continues with ARES nets every Tuesday evening
on the local ARES Repeaters VE3PRV and VA3PRA (presently down for repairs) and
usually gets between 8 and 15 check ins. The group turned out for the annual
Clarence-Rockland Classic Bicycle Race. A gruelling 84 km race throughout the
rural areas of the City of Clarence-Rockland. This year an APRS in the lead
vehicle provided continuous intel on the location of the frontrunners. This
information was displayed on a large screen at the Race organization HQ. This
allowed the organizers to be at specific points in the race on time and allowed
the cooking team to ensure timely preparation of the end of race meal. The
following operators provided professional communications in support of this
event: Don VE3RM Net Control, Chris VA3NKE, Jim VA3KV, Joy VA3YOJ, Mark VE3TKN,
Ron Va3RRZ, Jean VA3CO, Jean VE3ZJS, Lance VA3LP, Al VA3ONN and Al's wife
Suzanne. Thank you all for your continued support of the PR-ARES Group
activities.  The group along with the Prescott-Russell Amateur Radio Club, are
beginning preparations for this year's Field Day in June.

Report submitted by Lance Peterson Interim EC PR-ARES

The Renfrew County West ARES Group's EC Bob VE3YX and AEC George VE3GPD met
with the CEMC of Laurentian Valley to establish a relationship. The meeting was
productive with the CEMC gaining an understanding of our services. We
determined a location off the EOC for ARES operations and discussed the
installation of a permanent antenna.  A similar meeting is planned in a couple
of days with the CEMC for the Town of Petawawa.  We have had connections with
Petawawa in the past, but we have to discuss how we might work with the town
and see about an antenna installation at the EOC.  Early in April, an Arrow
type dual band antenna was installed on the roof of the Deep River town hall.
The feed line was routed to the room near the EOC that we would use when the
EOC is activated. A 2 meter packet/voice station has been prepared that will be
kept at the Deep River EOC.

A new KPC3+ has been installed at VE3NRR to provide a backup BBS for our
Outpost operations. The KA node replaces an X-1J4 node used to link the western
part of the county.  Report submitted by Bob Howard VE3YX EC RCW ARES

The Renfrew County East ARES Group has not submitted a report this month.  The
Stormont Dundas and Glengary ARES Group's close association with the Seaway
Valley Amateur Radio Club (SVARC) Inc.continues. During their last meeting held
on April 24, 2013 updates on ARES activities were provided to the membership.
ARES bulletins continue to be read each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on the club’s
2-Metre net

conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+). HAMs are also asked to check in on VE3MTA
(UHF) and our D-STAR repeaters. This process confirms the serviceability of our
repeater systems at least once a week should they be required by ARES.

The Group's expansion to “SD&G ARES” from the former “City of Cornwall ARES”
continues.  On Sunday, April 14, 2013, the Seaway Valley Amateur Radio Club
(SVARC) Inc. and the SD&G ARES group assisted our local St. John Ambulance
Brigade 103, with communications for the Raisin River Canoe Race. The race is
organized each year by the Raisin River Conservation Authority. This was the
41st race and was won in a time of 02:21:38. Additional information on the race
may be found at; http://www.standard-freeholder.com/2013/04/14/wetand-wild-race
While St. John Ambulance have their own two way radios, they are 5 Watt VHF
portables, which severely limit their range. This is not a problem for most of
the Public Duty events they attend, as most are confined to a small geographic
area. However, the Raisin River Canoe Race, stretching as it does from St.
Andrews West to Williamstown, a distance of 29 Km., is beyond their simplex VHF
communications capabilities. Our Amateur Radio group filled the gap again this
year, the second year we participated, by placing operators and VHF/UHF
equipment in three St. John Ambulance vehicles and the 7 accessible points
(bridges) along the race course. In addition, our event leader - Doug Pearson
(VE3HTR) used his vehicle as a mobile command post.

By using UHF repeater VE3MTA in Bonville, as well as a cross band repeater in
Williamstown, seamless communication was provided to all along the entire
route. This event was also an opportunity to test for the first time the cross
band repeater capability built into the Yaesu FT-8800 dual band VHF/UHF
transceivers, one reason for them being chosen for the core of our ARES radio
fleet. Credit for this decision goes to Tim Smith (VE3HCB SK) who made it an
essential feature needed for ARES operations where repeater coverage was
inadequate. Some technical lessons were learned, one of which is that CTCSS on
receive is absolutely essential for reliable cross band repeater operation. The
following 10 Amateur Radio Operators came out to help in the event: Bert
Lussier (VA3TL), Stan Fortune (VA3JSF), Jim Brelsford (VA3SPY), Joe Scott
(VE3ADB), Al Ross (VE3DMR), Elizabeth Halliwell (VE3EZH), Ed Halliwell
(VE3FHI), Doug Pearson (VE3HTR), Hal Green (VE3HWG) and Earle DePass (VE3IMP),
our SD&G ARES Emergency Coordinator (EC).

While we could have used additional operators St. John Ambulance was very
satisfied with and glad for our help. Some volunteers stood out on a cold and
windy bridge for much longer than they should have for health reasons.
Operators at the various Checkpoints (bridges) had to be quickly relocated for
coverage of other downstream Checkpoints, and some sites (Williamstown was one)
could have benefited from coverage early in the race but we had no one
available until much later, leaving the St. John Ambulance contingent in
Williamstown very much “in the dark” with regard to other aspects of their
operations. Coverage was also very limited in the “Patrol Sectors” between
Checkpoints, again because of lack of volunteers.  We may also consider
installing dual band amateur antennas on the Mobile First Aid Posts (MoFAP’s),
former provincial ambulances, as their configuration (an aluminum body which is
higher than the steel driver’s cab) does not favour use of a magnetic mount
antenna. But no ARES exercise runs perfectly, and every one of them is an
opportunity to learn how we can do better next time.

Following the conclusion of the race, a joint St. John Ambulance / Amateur
Radio meeting / debriefing was held at St. John Ambulance HQ in Cornwall. This
gave an opportunity to learn from each other how to improve operations in the
future.  Thank you to all who helped, hopefully more people will be available
next year.  Report submitted by Doug Pearson VE3HTR AEC SD&G ARES
