The Eastern Ontario ARES District was very busy this month. All the groups had
involvement with their communities, from rallies to community exercises and
some training. A lot of work in maintaining infrastructure is a continuing
effort for many groups as well. 

The Ottawa EMRG/ARES Group conducted their usual monthly repeater tests. Some
anomalies were found with the Western repeater. PYC and FFK are going to try to
figure it out. Thanks to test leader Dave VE3KMV, and participants Paul VE3CPH,
Mike VE3FFK, Ron VA3ACZ, Tim VA3PYC, and Bob VA3QV. The Winlink and local BBS
nodes were reported by Mike to be working OK, and VE2CRA appears functioning.
Mike is posting extracts of the Ontario RAC Bulletins to the VE3OCE-1 EMRG BBS
to ensure people have something to read while practicing their Packet skills.

On November 30, three of our members, Tyler VA3DGN, Mike VE3FFK and Rick VE3IHI
were among the 73 hams from as far away as Thunder Bay and North East US who
provided communications for the "Rally of the Tall Pines" around Bancroft, On.
With large cars moving very fast on marginal, icy roads, safety is always an
issue, By their nature, rallies take place away from population centres, where
cellular coverage is sparse. Amateur radio is still their best solution.

EMRG repeater VA3OFS VHF & UHF, located in Barrhaven, now has new antennas (or
at least the VHF antenna is new to the repeater). The original VHF antennas at
this site were tuned for the old Fire frequencies, so they worked, but not
well, and they were not positioned in the best location.

Making changes at this location has been on the books for some time, and we
recently got permission to make the change. This work has to be done by
professionals, and since EMRG has just enough money in the bank to pay for it,
I made the arrangements.

The VHF won't have a significant change, but it should perform a bit better to
the South and the UHF didn't really work at all before, so it now works great.

Frequencies:
VHF 146.670 (-) TX & RX Tone 136.5 Hz
UHF 444.950 (+) TX & RX Tone 136.5 Hz

Give them a try.

73, Mike Kelly VE3FFK, Ottawa ARES AEC, reporting for 
Richard Hagemeyer, VE3UNW Ottawa ARES EC/ EMRG team leader

For the Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group, VE3VY reports that on November 25th a
reception was held in Perth for Marc Garneau, MP and former Canadian astronaut.
Marc related his personal experiences during his time preparing for and
exploring space. During the presentation, Barrie, VE3BSB and 12 year old Zach
MacCracken, son of VE3ZKS, spoke about their experiences in high altitude
balloon experiments. They had a slide show giving details of their many balloon
flights, as well as pictures from space. Marc commented that it was a well kept
secret and was a wonderful way of introducing the subject of space to younger
persons.    A number of UHF repeaters donated by a local commercial operation
have been passed on to other clubs. Several remain available at this time.   
Winlink  is growing by leaps and bounds in the Rideau Lakes/Kingston area.
Besides previous reports outlining progress around Westport, work in
cooperation with the Frontenac Emcomm Group is moving along. There are now at
least 18, (or about to be) RMS Packet/RMSE on the air.  Some of the stations
are in the form of GO KITS. There are presently three fixed nodes and one
portable node. There are plans to place another Node at Clarendon Station, near
Kaladar.  Coverage has been extended to Perth through the efforts of VE3BSB.   
In the Almonte Area, the AARC was busy this month upgrading and adding
additional facilities to the Emergency Operations (EO) facility at the Almonte
General Hospital (AGH). Thanks to the generosity of Murray, VE3IFP/VA3IFP, the
facility now includes an all mode radio capable of working all bands including
HF. The HF antenna is a long wire type running from the tower alongside the EO
to a pole mounted on the hospital. This was tested on all HF bands and tuned
well. First contacts were made in the UK and others in Europe and South
America. A SignalLink unit has been acquired and will shortly be set up for
operation with Winlink etc. In addition a 5.8Ghz radio was installed on the
tower as the first phase of a broad band link to the Almonte fire hall. Thanks
to Fred, VE3CFZ for climbing the tower and installing that and the HF antenna.
The EO functions as the emergency communications hub for both for the hospital
and the municipality.    A breakfast meeting was held in Arnprior on November
20th with the Champlain Regional Repeater Association (CRRA) to discuss
potential collaboration on a D-STAR repeater at the VE3STP site as well as
other collaborative projects. Various system arrangements are being explored
for D-STAR operations.  On November 21st Rob, VE3UIX and Don, VE3PDF
participated in the simulated emergency test held jointly between the
municipalities of Mississippi Mills (MM) and Lanark Highlands. In the test AARC
ARES group simulated the provision of communications for MM as their own system
failed for a while during the exercise.  The annual AARC banquet is scheduled
for Saturday January 11th at the Royal Canadian Legion in Almonte. The evening
will start at 6.30pm with finger foods and to socialize while having a
beverage. This will be followed by a roast beef dinner. Back by popular demand
will be the radio controlled model aircraft group who will show and demonstrate
their latest “toys”. If any local amateurs would like to attend please indicate
by sending an email to info@almontearclub.ca.     73’s Norm

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group was involved in a Prescott-Russell county wide,
table top exercise centered in Embrun Ontario. All emergency response
communities from throughout the United Counties of Prescott and Russell were
involved. Many of our ARES Group were either away or unable to attend. However,
the group was represented by Harry VA3ZAK and Jean VA3ZJS on site with
participation at deployed  sites by Ron VA3RRZ, Mike VE3IPC, Pierre VA3SOF and
Jim VA3KV. The exercise coordinator was Dan Holmes, the CEMC for UCPR and was
attended by Emergency Management Ontario Capital Sector field officer, Philippe
Geoffrion. On site, Harry and Jean installed both HF and VHF voice capability.
They sent messages from the site to various outstations. Also, an ARES
presentation and video was delivered by Harry to the assembled participants.
The CEMC for Rockland, Pierre Sabourin was most interested in our capabilities.
More to follow throughout the winter as discussions with the communities
continues.

The Renfrew County East ARES Group has had a number of challenges this month as
our home VHF repeater, VE3STP, has been experiencing some technical
difficulties. Crews sent to the repeater site on several occasions have been
working to diagnose and repair the problems and have been only partially
successful. The onset of inclement weather (a.k.a. winter) will likely prevent
any further major work until spring 2014. As a result of the issues the
RCE-ARES net did not launch in November. However, in spite of the repeater's
challenge, it will do so in December. 

On November 29, 2013, Debra VE3IEH and RCE-EC, attended a training course at
AECL in Chalk River. The course was entitled "Radiation Safety Awareness" and
it was provided by CRL (Chalk River Laboratories) Emergency Preparedness.
Attended by first responders and others involved in emergency preparedness and
response, the course was an overview of the nuclear program and how emergency
workers would be monitored and kept safe during issues such as a plume release
or a spill of radioactive materials.

Debra VE3IEH
RCE-ARES Emergency (Group) Coordinator

The Renfrew County West ARES Group did not have a lot of activity this month.
There was the usual 4 weekly nets. Rob VA3AGN from our group and Deb VE3IEH, GC
for RCE- ARES are to attend a radiation course for emergency workers given by
AECL in Deep River on the 29th of Nov. 

73 de Bob    VE3YX

The SD&G Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) continues it’s close
association with the SVARC continues.  During our last meeting held on Nov. 27,
2013 updates on ARES activities were provided to the membership.

ARES bulletins continue to be read each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on the club’s
2-Metre net conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+).   HAMs are also asked to check
in on the VE3MTA (UHF) repeater.  This process confirms the serviceability of
our repeater systems at least once a week should they be required by ARES.

Our expansion to “SD&G ARES” from the former “City of Cornwall ARES” continues.  

Earl VE3IMP attended the Joint Emergency Exercise and Training session of the
Township of North Dundas, Township of South Dundas, United Counties of
Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry at the Township of South Stormont on November
14, 2013.

Our next ARES-wide exercise is now planned for Feb. 1, 2014.

Earle DePass, (VE3IMP)
Emergency Coordinator (EC), 
SD&G ARES
