EASTERN ONTARIO ARES DISTRICT
Report February 2014

The Eastern Ontario ARES District is again alive and kicking. Most of the
groups have finished their winter games and are preparing for the spring and
summer exercises. It is with a heavy heart that I report we have lost a very
important supporter of ARES in Eastern Ontario, Don Dashney VE3RM (SK). If you
wish to post thoughts and comments as well as pictures, an FB page has been
developed: www.facebook.com/DonVE3RM

The Ottawa EMRG/ARES Group The high point of activity in February was our
participation in safety and logistics communications for The Canadian Ski
Marathon. This activity involved 40 hams, about a third of them members of EMRG
/ Ottawa ARES. This event requires hams at fixed points, as mobile operators
and on skies, traveling the course through the back country of Quebec. Although
cellular coverage is available on some of the course, there are still a lot of
places where ham radio is the most practical way to communicate. By the way,
even when cell coverage is available, when 911 gets a call from an injured
skier, they call us, since it would be the radio equipped safety team who would
work out the logistics of getting the casualty from the trail to a place where
an ambulance can reach. The volunteers for this year’s CSM were:

VA2KEY Daniel, VA2SLB Clarence, VA3ACZ Ron, VA3BIT Arthur, VA3CDD Dean, VA3DGN
Tyler, VA3GDG Jonathon, VA3LZY Georges, VA3PJS Peter, VA3SWY Austin, VA3TGS
Theresa, VA3TTE Donna, VA3TXN Tracy, VA3UNK Harold, VA3VK Christine, VA3VXN
Margaret, VE2AAY François, VE2DDZ Malcolm, VE2FFS Souly, VE2STQ Stéphane,
VE3BDC Duncan, VE3CBJ Clayton, VE3CZO Wayne, VE3DW Bill, VE3FFK Mike, VE3FRB
Gordon, VE3GJM Gil, VE3HYS Harrie, VE3IET Gaëtan, VE3JGL Luc, VE3JKG John,
VE3JRL Lynda, VE3KMV David, VE3ORL Jean-Marc, VE3PUE Neil, VE3UMC Mike, VE3UNW
Richard, VE3XGP Gordon, VE3XRA Glenn and VE3ZTU Alan.  The usual monthly
repeater tests were also conducted on February 5, with Dave, VE3KMV doing the
usual coordination of Ron VA3ACZ, Mike VE3FFK, Bob VA3QV, Stuart VE3SMF,Mike
VE3UMC, Sandy VE3AAC, and Paul VE3CPH. This was a larger than usual group of
check ins, and well dispersed geographically. All was well, with some anomalies
noted once again on the Western repeater. We are still looking at the problem.

Mike Kelly VE3FFK, reporting for EMRG team leader / Ottawa ARES EC Richard
Hagemeyer, VE3UNW

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group was busy this month on two fronts. First the
preparations are underway for the Rockland Classic Bicycle Race on April 6.
This race provides the group with an opportunity each year to get out in the
public eye and practice providing communications service.

Also, members of the group spent time at the bedside of a very dear friend to
not only the amateurs of the Prescott-Russell ARES group but to many amateurs
throughout eastern Ontario, Western Quebec and around the world. Sadly, on the
12 day of February, 2014, Don Dashney VE3RM, became a silent key. Don was a
patriarch to most of the members of our group, always willing to share his vast
knowledge of radios and amateur radio. Don was an avid contester and his
expertise helped us through many of our Field Days. His sage advice kept us on
the straight and narrow and allowed our group to make our decisions on sound
principles. Don’s smiling face and kindness to all will be sorely missed.  Good
bye Don and safe journey to you new ham shack. 73

The Renfrew County East ARES Group representatives (EC Debra VE3IEH) and
Renfrew County West CW (EC Bob VE3YX and AEC George VE3GPD) ARES groups met on
February 19 at the Nick Smith Centre with the Association of Ontario Road
Supervisors (AORS) trade show Chairperson (Steve Boland), Logistics Manager
(Don England), Director of Recreation Services (Glenn Arthur) for the Town of
Arnprior and Fred Blackstein VE3FPB. Members of the Lanark-Leeds ARES group
were not able to attend, however they are expected to be full participants in
the ARES callout on June 4 and 5, 2014.  The group was escorted through the
Nick Smith Centre and the grounds and provided with a full description of where
key stakeholders would be located. The AORS team provided several options
concerning where the ARES team would like to set up and the likely choice will
be outside in the 40X100 tent along with the registration table. Hydro will be
available in the tent. The ARES team was invited to have an information table
available in addition to the portable operation station. Bob VE3YX proposed
that HF equipment be included as a way to "advertise" amateur radio. Debra
VE3IEH stated that she may have a highly portable vertical antenna by then that
could be used to cover all of the HF bands and indicated that she would lend it
for the purpose of the ARES presence at the show.  The AORS team fully
understand that the ARES people are there for one purpose only and that is for
communications. (There will be no parking or security tasks assigned to us.) It
is anticipated that RCE will supply teams of four ARES members to cover two
shifts (7:30 am to 12:00 pm on June 4 AND 5) with RCW supplying a team of four
to cover one shift (12:00 pm to 4:00 pm on June 4 OR 5) and Lanark-Leeds to
supply a team of four to cover one shift (12:00 pm to 4:00 pm on June 4 OR 5).
In all shifts two members will be responsible to work the base station and two
members will circulate through the exhibit areas in watching for anyone needing
assistance or as "extra" eyes.

The teams will meet again in May to tie up any loose ends and to present their
action plans.  Information on the Association of Ontario Road Supervisors can
be found at this link: www.aors.on.ca

In other news, Debra VE3IEH will be meeting with a co-owner of the Neat Coffee
Shop in Burnstown to discuss how ARES members might be of assistance with their
"Get There From Here" initiative which is a series of runs or bike rides of
varying lengths from nearby towns using scenic routes. These activities are
scheduled to be held from April 26 to October 8.

Debra A. Bee VE3IEH
EC-RCE ARES

The Renfrew County West ARES Group held 4 Wednesday evening nets this month on
the VE3STP repeater located in. As well as attendance reported in the RCE Group
report, the Group provided safety communications for Deep River's Silver Spoon
Ski Race for the 41st time on February 8th. AGC Dom VE3DGZ and Ken VE2HFX
operated the base stations on 2 m and 70 cm. Richard VA3BIX was at the ski
chalet to provide communications for the ski patrol if required. Dan VE9DAN,
Bob VE3YYG and GC Bob VE3YX were stationed strategically along the route.
Fortunately, there were no incidents although we did have to keep track of one
skier that took a "long cut". The stations in the field relayed the bib numbers
of the skiers as they passed and the base stations checked them on the start
sheets. All the handhelds in the field were on 2 m and a car with cross band
was positioned to provide 70 cm to the base for 2 of the more distant sites.
One of our group members, Tony VA3HWH participated in the race having missed
only one race in the 42 years it has run.

73 de Bob VE3YX

The SD&G Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) Official ARES Bulletins ARES
bulletins continue to be read each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on the club’s
2-Metre net conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+). HAMs are also asked to then
check in on the VE3MTA (UHF) repeater. Occasionally we also call for check ins
on a new ARES repeater located in Cornwall (VE3VSW) and VE3SVR in Morrisburg.
This process confirms the serviceability of nearby SVARC repeater systems at
least once a week, should they be required by SD&G ARES.

Update ARES Exercise - Feb. 1, 2014 Our exercise with; The Cornwall Red Cross,
The Township of South Stormont, The Township of South Glengarry and The City of
Cornwall, on Saturday, Feb. 1, 2014 went well. The exercise involved 7 related
sites and 5 ARES operators. During the 4 hour onthe-air exercise the simulated
emergency of an ice storm allowed us to confirm the serviceability of the ARES
installations at 7 locations close to Cornwall, simulate an emergency and pass
related traffic using official RAC radiogram forms. It allowed us to enhance
radio communications with the CEMC's of the above organizations. The exercise
including the debrief which followed over lunch allowed us to better prepare
for emergencies where SD&G ARES may be called on to respond. The exercise went
well and reinforced that we have many strengths. It also allowed us to make
over 29 recommendations for improvements to our system.

Earle DePass, (VE3IMP)
Emergency Coordinator (EC),
SD&G ARES
