Eastern Ontario ARES District
Report March 2014

The Eastern Ontario ARES District has a few groups preparing for exercises and
community support events. Now is the time for everyone to get out and test your
equipment and prepare for deployment.


The Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group performed their regular weekly nets on
Wednesday evenings.  VA3DOY has established an RMS Packet station with Internet
connection making it the 2nd Westport Gateway. The digital group at Westport
has had several training/workshop sessions. VE3VY has suggested a discussion
meeting be held at the Smith Falls Flea Market regarding digital
interoperability. 

Norm VE3VY

The Ottawa ARES/EMRG Group conducted their monthly repeater tests on March 5,
with Dave, VE3KMV doing the usual coordination of Sandy VE3AAC, Tim VA3PYC,
Mike VE3FFK, Paul VE3CPH, Ron VA3ACZ, and Brian VE3UU. Apart from the usual
minor anomalies, all repeaters checked out OK.

Mike Kelly VE3FFK, reporting for EMRG team leader / Ottawa ARES EC Richard
Hagemeyer, VE3UNW

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group is preparing for the Clarence Rockland Classic
Bicycle Race on April 6th. All equipment is being tested and the map data is
being updated for the race. The Group is still trying to find some nice weather
to initiate some much needed maintenance on their two repeaters, VE3PRV and
VA3PRA. At the same time the digipeater for PR-ARES will be installed and
tested. Broadband Hamnet is still being discussed and several WRT54 routers
have been acquired and the software changed for MESH. Some VOIP SIP phones have
been found and will be used to help test and evaluate MESH as a system for
ARES.

The Renfrew County East ARES Group, in preparation for an ARES exercise
scheduled to take place on April 6 in Lanark County, RCE-EC Debra VE3IEH and
member Rick VA3RWH traveled to the Pembroke Red Cross on March 26 to attend a
crash course on packet radio and Outpost. Facilitated by RCW-EC Bob VE3YX and
assisted by Yvonne VE3RYA, the day consisted of setting up two portable packet
stations and becoming familiar with Outpost. These stations will be used in the
upcoming exercise to provide communications for an EOC as well as another as
yet unspecified location. Details are not being announced in advance of the
exercise. Red Cross volunteer John VE3IOI will operate one of the portable
stations and Richard VE3BIX will be responsible for the fixed packet station at
the Red Cross office in Pembroke. More on this next month.

After encountering multiple and frustrating difficulties with her laptop, Debra
VE3IEH finally was able to complete the on-line course for the IMS-100
Introduction to (the) Incident Management System. Successful completion was
required as a prerequisite to taking the next level course IMS-200 Basic
Incident Management. The IMS-200 course will be delivered by Philippe Geoffrion
of the Office of the Fire Marshal and Emergency Management in a classroom
setting at the library in Deep River on April 3 and 4. More on this next month.

Debra A. Bee VE3IEH
RCE-EC, ARES


Pictured: John VA3IOI, Bob VE3YX, Rick VA3RWH, Richard VA3BIX at the Outpost
training (Photograph by Debra VE3IEH. Also present was Yvonne VE3RYA.


The Renfrew County West ARES Group had 4 nets this month. John VA3IOI, who is a
Red Cross volunteer in the Pembroke office, alerted us to a Red Cross exercise
that is planned for Apr. 6th. While details are being kept secret, he was told
that the EOC and shelter would be in Carleton Place in Lanark County. The
exercise would require that messages be passed amongst Carleton Place and the
Ottawa and Pembroke Red Cross offices. The 3 locations meant that 3 ARES groups
would be affected; RCW-ARES for the Pembroke office, EMRG for the Ottawa office
and Lanark County ARES for Carleton Place. Previous exercises had messages
being passed between the Ottawa and Pembroke Red Cross offices using packet
with Outpost. The Lanark group is using D-STAR with D-RATS. While it might be
possible for John and Debra VE3IEH, GC for RCE-ARES to use the VE3STP packet
node to relay messages to Pembroke and Ottawa, an alternative is also planned.
Tim VA3PYC is experimenting with providing a manual bridge between D-STAR and
Outpost at his home station which is well positioned to reach all 3 sites. This
a good opportunity for the groups to work together and see how the different
systems can function together.

In preparation for the exercise (cheating), an Outpost training session was
held in the Pembroke Red Cross office on the 26th. 2 complete portable stations
were set up in the office and messages were passed amongst them and the
installed station in the office. Bob VE3YX, RCW-ARES GC led the training for
Deb VE3IEH, John VA3IOI, Rick VA3RWH and Richard VA3BIX. Yvonne VE3RYA was
along to assist with the training. John and Debra each took one of the portable
stations to attempt their use during the exercise.

Deb VE3IEH, Dom VE3DGZ, and Bob VE3YX, will be taking the IMS-200 course
provided by EMO on the 3rd and 4th of Apr. The course is being given in Deep
River primarily to AECL personnel, but ARES was provided with a few positions.

73
Bob VE3YX
