Eastern Ontario ARES District
September 2013 Report

The Eastern Ontario ARES District was very busy in some areas and very quiet in
others. The District Emergency Coordinator, Lance VA3LP visited Renfrew County
to deliver a district ARES course this month.  As a result we have a much
larger group now with basic ARES skills and an understanding of what ARES is
about in Renfrew County. Here is the latest from the district.

Renfrew County WestNo activity for Sep. We have a Nuclear Plan EOC exercise
planned for Oct 17th. We will be using Outpost to pass messages amongst the
EOC, Red Cross Pembroke, Red Cross Ottawa and possibly one other site.

With the change of policing in Pembroke from Pembroke Police to OPP, we are not
sure yet if we will be doing our regular Goblin Night and Halloween Night
patrols. 73 de Bob

Renfrew County East

Members of the Champlain Regional Repeater Association (CRRA) as part of
RCE-ARES, and invited guests, attended ARES training on September 20 and 21,
2013, at the Dacre and Area Community Association (DACA) centre presented by
DEC Lance Peterson VA3LP. A deployed exercise was conducted on Saturday at five
sites in and around Dacre using VE3STP and various simplex frequencies. The
weather was decidedly uncooperative; however, after the successful completion
of the exercise the participants returned to the DACA centre for de-briefing,
strawberry-rhubarb pie, and the presentation of Certificates of Achievement
indicating that everyone had completed the Eastern Ontario ARES District
Training.

RCE will be launching its ARES net in the near future and it is planning to
hold at least one modest exercise before the snow flies.  While not directly
connected to RCE-ARES, the CRRA would like to announce the acquisition of an 8'
x 8' solid aluminum "bungalow" donated by the Canadian Pacific Railway. This
structure will eventually be used as either a replacement for the shack
currently housing VE3STP or as a second shack for another repeater or related
equipment.

District ARES Course Attendees: VA3RWH VE3IEH VE3JA VE3JSQ VE3AAC
VE3TUC VE3ELM VA3RKO VA3TJP VE3JGU VE3AMN VE3PM
Debra A. Bee VE3IEH EC for RCE-ARES


Ottawa ARES Group/EMRG

September was another infrastructure month in Ottawa. The monthly repeater
tests, were directed by Dave, VE3KMV with the participation of Tracy VA3TXN,
Ron VA3ACZ, Mike VE3FFK, Paul VE3CPH, Bob VA3QV, Tim VA3PYC, Harry VE3FD, and
Roger VE3NPO on September 4. This was a record turnout for these routine tests.
On September 7 EMRG was able to turn some "quality collectables" into cash at
the Carp Hamfest.  With what was sold and with some metal and batteries that
went to the scrap ealer, we brought in close to $900. This will be used to
build two radio systems, one for the fire dispatch centre and a matching system
for the backup dispatch. Thanks to: The Ottawa ARC who provide EMRG with a free
spot every year to set up our booth, allowing us a chance to provide
information and talk to amateurs about EMRG; Tracy VA3TXN and Ron VA3ACZ for
their help loading; Tim VA3PYC and Ron for their help unloading; and Tim for
spending the day at the EMRG table.  About $2K worth of batteries were acquired
to replace and upgrade or install backup capabilities at the various repeater
sites.  On September 24, Peter VE3BQP and Mike VE3FFK visited 3 of the 4 EMRG
repeater sites for various tasks. At the West repeater, the backup battery was
replaced after several years of service. At the South repeater, adjustments
were made to the UHF antenna, while at the East repeater a back up battery
system was installed where none had previously existed. The VHF antenna there
was to be replaced with a multiband one, but due to difficulties encountered in
the mounting system this part of the site visit was postponed. Coming up in
October, in addition to something SET related (we don't know yet what), there
is an exercise with the Red Cross, providing communications between the Ottawa
and Pembroke Red Cross offices. Mike FFK and Tim PYC have agreed to help with
set up and final testing of the packet station at Ottawa Red Cross before the
exercise day.  Yet more work is needed on the systems being built at the
communications centre, including some cabling and installation. There are also
some metal cabinets that require cleanup and installation of casters, power
supplies and batteries, so we can use them as portable radio units at the
dispatch centres. We also need to wire up the computer network, so we can set
up the PCs. Even with this long a "to do" list, when you look around at other
ARES groups, we seem to be in relatively good shape for hardware.

73 Mike Kelly VE3FFK, Ottawa ARES AEC, reporting for Richard
Hagemeyer, VE3UNW Ottawa ARES EC/ EMRG team leader.
