EASTERN ONTARIO ARES DISTRICT
Report January 2014

The Eastern Ontario ARES District has been quiet again this month due to
weather. We were extremely lucky that the weather did not cause large power
outages and deploy our groups. Instead, most stayed indoors with their
equipment or enjoyed winter sports. For some, getting away was the way to go.
From the looks of things it will be a busy spring this year with groups
becoming involved in many activities: Sporting events, community exercises;
upgrading equipment and training activities.

And remember: Be safe. Get Prepared. Stay ready.

The Ottawa EMRG/ARES Group had only one activity this month which was the usual
repeater test. It went well with a good turnout and all repeaters checked out.
Thanks to Tracy VA3TXN, Tim VA3PYC, Roger VE3NPO, Arthur VA3BIT, and Sandy
VE3AAC. Good coverage near the boundaries (Tracy at Metcalfe and Tim at Carp).
The Barrhaven UHF repeater on 444.950 is working quite well.

Upcoming on February 2 will be a test and tune session for radio volunteers to
check out their gear prior to the Canadian Ski Marathon on Feb 8 and 9.

Mike Kelly VE3FFK reporting for EC Richard Hagemeyer VE3UNW

The Lanark/North Leeds ARES Group January report is basically NIL owing mainly
to weather The only work going on aside from regular activities is the
construction of a 440 repeater for Westport, to be linked to the LNLARES
Network. To be installed when weather permits, and used to cover the dead spots
in the Westport Village area. Saturday morning breakfasts continue.

Norm VE3VY

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group members were very busy this month with personal
activities and with the cold weather, not much was done outside the homes. A
few folks are on vacation, some are involved with family and friends while
others are active with outdoor activities like skiing and snowmobiling. This
would be a good time for a winter exercise!  Work is still progressing on a
MESH network as well as preparations for the installation of a packet
digipeater at the VE3PRV repeater site. Preparations have begun for the
upcoming Rockland Classic Bike Race on the 6th of April.

The Renfrew County East ARES Group reports that In a referral from Cory
Nicholas of the Arnprior Fire Department, Debra was contacted by the Homes
Coordinator for L’Arche Arnprior, a faith based network of communities for
people with or without developmental disabilities. (Their charter, mission and
vision is outlined in the website www.larche.org.) In Ontario, it is funded by
the Ministry of Community and Social Services. L'Arche just had a compliance
review and under regulation 299/10 they are to formulate an Emergency
Preparedness Plan for each of their homes, in the event of a disaster. A
meeting is being planned in order to determine how the ARES members of RCE can
serve this worthy organization as a part of their plan.

Discussions are underway for another opportunity for RCE-ARES to take place in
Arnprior in June 2014. A municipal trade show for the Association of Ontario
Road Supervisors will be held at the Nick Smith Centre on June 4 and 5. It is
estimated that there will be 250 exhibitors of materials, services and
equipment needed to maintain municipal roads and infrastructure projects. The
show is also a showcase for GPS/GIS technology, staff training, underground
utility locators, wastewater treatment and traffic control. The organizers
expect approximately 3000 visitors. Debra will meet with the Chairperson for
the show as well as several other organizers on February 19 in Arnprior. She
anticipates that, depending on the needs of the organizers, it may be necessary
to call out additional ARES members under the mutual aid program.

Debra A. Bee VE3IEH
EC, RCE-ARES
Qui me amat, amat et canem meum.

The Renfrew County West ARES Group reports no Activity for this month other
than the 5 weekly nets. Upcoming is the Silver Spoon Ski race on Saturday, Feb.
8th. We will be setting up 3 stations on the course and 2 base stations (if we
get enough people).  Reporting: Bob VE3YX

The SD&G Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) group continues to read the
Official ARES Bulletins each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on the club’s 2-Metre
net conducted on VE3SVC (147.180MHz.+). HAMs are also asked to then check in on
the VE3MTA (UHF) repeater. Occasionally we also call for check ins on a new
ARES repeater located in Cornwall (VE3VSW) and VE3SVR in Morrisburg. This
process confirms the serviceability of nearby SVARC repeater systems at least
once a week, should they be required by SD&G ARES.

Update on upcoming ARES Exercise - Feb. 1, 2014. With the advanced planning and
support from The Cornwall Red Cross, The Township of South Stormont, The
Township of South Glengarry and The City of Cornwall, on Saturday, Feb. 1, 2014
we held a training exercise involving 7 related sites and 5 ARES operators.
During the 4 hour on-the-air exercise the simulated emergency of an ice storm
allowed us to confirm the serviceability of the ARES installations at 7
locations close to Cornwall, simulate an emergency and pass related traffic
using official RAC radiogram forms. It allowed us to enhance radio
communications with the CEMC's of the above organizations. The exercise
including the debrief which followed over lunch allowed us to better prepare
for emergencies where SD&G ARES may be called on to respond. The exercise went
well and reinforced that we have many strengths. It also allowed us to make
over 14 recommendations for improvements to our system.

Earle DePass, (VE3IMP)
Emergency Coordinator (EC),
SD&G ARES
