Eastern Ontario ARES District
Report April 2014

For the Eastern Ontario ARES District things are picking up for the groups.
Three of the groups participated in a single exercise to differing degrees.
Each group came out of the exercise with usefull information on improvements to
their plans and procedures. This is the kind of Mutual Aid interaction that is
necessary to fully support some of our clients. More to come in the future.
Next big Amateur radio event is Field Day in June. Hope to hear many of the
groups on the air.

The Ottawa ARES/EMRG Group conducted their monthly repeater test on Apr 2 with
Ron VA3ACZ, Arthur VA3BIT, Tim VA3PYC, Bob VA3QV, Paul VE3CPH and Mike VE3FFK
checking in, and Dave VE3KMV, controlling the net. There was some "crackling"
in the audio of VE3EMV/east but otherwise all was well.

There was some participation in a Red Cross exercise "Eastern Shocker" on Apr
6, but it was not designed to have a large ARES component, so there was little
for EMRG / Ottawa ARES to do in it. Nevertheless, Tim VA3PYC, Peter VE3BQP,
Mike VE3FFK and Richard VE3UNW were able to assist somewhat. Even with this
little amount of participation, A few "holes" in the notification procedure
were found.

In addition to the usual repeater test, there are three public service events
coming up in May: The Lanark Highlands car rally, The CNCycle for CHEO and the
"Lap the Gats" cycle tour for Parkinsons research on May 31

73 Mike Kelly VE3FFK AEC, reporting for Richard Hagemeyer EMRG team leader/
Ottawa ARES EC.

The Prescott-Russell ARES Group participated again this year in the
Clarence-Rockland Classic bicycle race. This is a grueling 85 km race over the
back roads of the city of Clarence-Rockland. This year was wet and muddy and a
couple of detours had to be put in place for the race. At the front of the race
in the lead vehicle was Jean VE3OKK and Jean VA3ZJS. They used voice to pass
race traffic and APRS was used to keep track of the lead car back at HQ. Chris
VA3NKE was in the safety vehicle at the back of the race to keep tabs on the
last riders and close down checkpoints as they passed them. Lance VA3LP was NC
at HQ and provided data to the race coordinators on the status of the race.
Norm VA3NPL, Jim VA3KV, George VA3SUS, Ron VA3RRZ and Ray VA3OMM and his wife
Suzanne leapfrogged around the track from checkpoint to checkpoint to provided
safety at high traffic intersections throughout the race. In the end, no
bicyclist was lost and the race was a success for both the race organizers and
the PR-ARES Group.

For the Renfrew County East ARES Group  April has turned out to be an active
month. Debra VE3IEH and EC for RCE attended the Incident Management System
course IMS-200 organized by Atomic Energy Chalk River Laboratories (AECL) in
Deep River on April 3 and 4. Bob VE3YX and EC for RCW was also a participant.
The two days were facilitated by Philippe Geoffrion, Field Officer for the
Office of the Fire Marshall and Emergency Measures (Ontario) and the time was
jam packed with information, mini-tests, exercises and a final examination. The
choice to take the exam on either an individual or a team asis was presented to
the group and Debra and Bob choose to form a team with 4 other participants.
This team was very successful and certificates were provided to all 6 members.
While IMS-200 provided an excellent overview of the history, theory, strategy
and implementation of the incident management system in the province, it was
only minimally directly relevant to the ARES mandate. Debra feels that it is
certainly valuable as a tool to understand how emergency situations are
handled. There are other level courses being developed for this system in
addition to the half-day of instruction designed to allow the successful
participant to teach IMS-200.

On April 6 an exercise was held in Carleton Place between the Red Cross and
ARES groups from Ottawa and up the valley and including members of the
Lanark-Leeds group. Unfortunately callout procedures were not consistent or
were entirely absent (for example, Lanark-Leeds was not called out until after
10am on the Sunday and members of RCE never received a callout in spite of
being placed on stand-by on the evening of the 5th). Repeater VE3STP was a
major factor in the success of the exercise as it was being used for both
packet and voice. The members of Lanark-Leeds conducted a successful experiment
using their D-star repeater. Due to a planned interruption in power on the 6th
for some work by hydro crews replacing poles, the equipment switched to the
emergency backup battery system at approximately 1:30 in the afternoon. When
power was restored the voice repeater did not come back into service and it
failed. Debra and RCE-ARES member Rick VA3RWH made a hasty trip to the repeater
site to determine what had happened. The snow was still very deep and it took
them 30 minutes to walk into the site. Upon access to the shack it was evident
that the packet repeater had not failed and that it continued to function
beautifully throughout the exercise. A remote diagnostic was performed by
RCE-ARES member Sandy VE3AAC and Debra and Rick were able to re-boot the voice
repeater successfully at about 4pm.

Members of 3 ARES groups (RCE, RCW and Lanark-Leeds) gathered together for
breakfast in Cobden on April 23. Their numbers were joined by a Red Cross
volunteer from the Pembroke office, John VE3IOI, who was involved in the
exercise on April 6. Attendees who had not been participants in the exercise
listened to a short de-briefing discussion concerning what went right and what
went wrong on that Sunday. Also discussed was the progress being made with
regard to a D-star link being designed for VE3STP to be connected to the
Almonte ARC system. The design of the linking system can be attributed to
RCE-ARES and CRRA member Rob VE3JA. We are awaiting a suitable frequency pair
to be assigned before testing can begin.

Events coming up in May include the Smith's Falls Hamfest on May 10 and the
CANWARN session on May 21 (Renfrew).

Debra A. Bee, VE3IEH

The Renfrew County West ARES Group held 5 regular Wednesday evening nets in
April.

The Group participated in a Red Cross exercise on Apr. 6th that included
activities in Pembroke, Carleton Place and Ottawa. Our part of the exercise was
for Richard VA3BIX to operate the ARES station in the Pembroke Red Cross
building. John VA3IOI who is both an ARES volunteer and a Red Cross volunteer
set up a portable packet/voice station at the EOC in Carleton Place. The joint
operation with RCW-ARES using packet with Outpost and Lanark with DSTAR and
D-RATS led to interesting and valuable lessons. Tim VA3PYC near Carp provided a
valuable and efficient bridge between the two systems 

The Stormont Dundas and Glengary ARES Group continue to read the ARES bulletins
each Monday, at 7:00 PM local, on the club’s 2-Metre net conducted on VE3SVC
(147.180MHz.+).   HAMs are also asked to then check in on the VE3MTA (UHF)
repeater.  Occasionally we also call for check ins on a new ARES repeater
located in Cornwall (VE3VSW) and VE3SVR in Morrisburg.   This process confirms
the serviceability of nearby SVARC repeater systems at least once a week,
should they be required by SD&G ARES.

A record 17 HAM operators participated in the Raisin River Canoe Races - April
27, 2014, providing communications for St. John Ambulance.  This is the third
year we have provided this kind of communications support for which St. John
Ambulance was grateful.  Operators staffed 7 checkpoints and other locations to
be in a better position to call for help should some canoeist need first aid
during this 32 Kilometre race from St. Andrews West to Williamstown.  A
cross-band repeater was established but had only marginal results.  

Earle DePass, (VE3IMP)
Emergency Coordinator (EC), 
SD&G ARES
