EMRG is also known as Ottawa ARES, two names, one group, one purpose.  The two
names can be a bit confusing for new EMRG members, so hopefully this note will
help clear up the naming and the ARES relationship.

ARES (Amateur Radio Emergency Service) provides a common look and feel for
volunteer Amateur radio emergency communications groups across the country. In
Canada, ARES is administered by Radio Amateurs of Canada (RAC). RAC does not
assign ARES groups, rather an EC (Emergency Coordinator) is appointed for an
area. The EC is responsible for establishing and maintaining clients,
partnerships, and a group of amateurs that will support him/her in providing
communications for those clients. ARES groups exist at a local level, to
support local needs. The responsibility and authority in ARES is at the local
EC level. The other levels in ARES above the EC are there to provide
administrative and organizational support.

Through Mutual Aid, ARES groups work together to link wider areas, and to
provide additional resources to each other. Eastern Ontario has an excellent
Mutual Aid program, with yearly meetings that keep improving on the
relationships and plans. It is recognized that no ARES group can sustain a
deployment for very long, using only it's own members, so Mutual Aid is a
requirement, not an option.

In Ottawa, EMRG has existed in different forms, over many years. In 1999 RAC
requested that the EMRG Team Leader accept the ARES EC appointment for Ottawa,
which would make EMRG an ARES group. There was a move to expand the ARES name
in Ontario at the time and RAC HQ had now moved to Ottawa, so it would look
better if the local volunteer group was an ARES group. The idea was
investigated and the EMRG management team accepted the idea, so EMRG then had
two names, EMRG and Ottawa ARES. The original EMRG name was kept since all our
agreements use the EMRG name and our group was known as EMRG for a long time.

While most ARES groups support a local Municipality, the ARES group at
Emergency Management Ontario (EMO) headquarters in Toronto supports a
Provincial organization rather than a geographical area. The relationship
between Ottawa ARES and EMO ARES is the same as with other ARES groups. Through
Mutual Aid, the two groups would work to support the end goal, which would be
communications between the City of Ottawa and the Provincial Emergency
Operations Centre in Toronto.

Communications with EMO is no more important than communications within the
City of Ottawa, or with neighbouring ARES groups. Local information must be
collected and reviewed in order to understand the local situation, so there
will be information to exchange with EMO. EMO ARES will request Situation
Reports (SitReps) directly from local Amateurs during an emergency. This is a
practice that EMRG and the City of Ottawa do not support, so EMRG members are
asked not to provide these reports.  Only the City of Ottawa can speak for
conditions in the City.

Based on the low probability of losing long distance communications, the
alternate local phone service arrangements implemented by the City, plus the
option to use satellite phones, it is unlikely that the City of Ottawa would
ever require EMRG to provide communications to EMO in Toronto. If EMRG was
requested to provide communications, it would use the shortest radio path
possible, meaning that VHF radio would be used to reach a station that has
working phone service, either within the City, or in a neighbouring
Municipality. If there is no VHF radio option, then HF would be used, through a
home HF Relay station.

While ARES client agreements are created at a local level, RAC has a signed MOU
with the National Red Cross. This is a symbolic agreement, since the actual
interaction and support between ARES and Red Cross is at the local level. Local
ARES groups like EMRG are responsible to build a relationship with their local
Red Cross. Without the local relationship, the National MOU is just a piece of
paper.

Hopefully this helps define the basics of ARES and EMRG. If you have any
questions, please feel free to send them.

Regards
Peter - VE3BQP

Team Leader -Emergency Measures Radio Group Emergency Coordinator (EC)
-Ottawa ARES
